This is something that I’ve been thinking about for a while, mostly prompted by my own experiences and Matt Colville’s content on TTRPGs (tabletop role playing games). I’ve been playing digital RGPs for a long time (the earliest one I can think of is Knights of the Old Republic in 2003) but I’m pretty new to the TTRPG scene, I’ve only been a player for a couple years and a game master (GM) for one. And the only games I’ve played or run are DnD 5e and Fabula Ultimate. This post is gonna be a general discussion of the genre, but I intend to follow it up with a deeper dive into TTRPG design in the future!

RPGs are a funny genre of games to talk about, because it’s been almost 50 years since the first one was developed (the original edition of Dungeons and Dragons in 1974!). In that time, thousands of games have been released across different mediums, evolving it into dozens and dozens of sub genres. Adam Millard has a really interesting video on this phenomenon that I’ll link at the end of this blogpost. It’s on the longer side (26 and a half minutes long) so I’ll try and summarize it. He concludes that the main core of any RPG is character. Specifically, the character or characters that you directly control. There’s many different methods that RPGs will use to get you to care about character, but they generally fall under a couple categories. Most games won’t attempt all of them, but will instead focus on a single one or a subset.

Player Agency
Mechanical Progression
Narrative Progression
Design Control

Player agency covers things like character customization and dynamic settings that will react to player choice. A couple of examples of games that emphasize player agency are Disco Elysium (ZA/UM), Prey (Arkane), Baldur’s Gate 3 (Larian). Giving the player the ability to customize their character both physically and mechanically and then to use that character to enact change within the  world is a powerful way to get the player to care.

Mechanical progression follows in a similar method of thinking. Once a player has decided on the kind of character they want to play, the next logical step is for the game to show how that character grows within the language of the gameplay. Examples of games that focus on mechanical progression are Diablo (Blizzard), Borderlands (Gearbox), and Warframe (Digital Extremes). In these games, it’s easy to get sucked into the gameplay loop of expanding your character’s abilities through acquiring levels and/or loot and then using those new abilities to tackle larger and larger obstacles in the pursuit of higher levels and shinier loot.

Narrative progression is similar to mechanical progression, but instead of showing player growth through the lens of gameplay, it shows it through the narrative of the story. Because of the limited design space inherent to any game,  generally games that focus on narrative progression tend to de-emphasize mechanical progression and vice-versa. Games like Mass Effect (Bioware), Persona (Atlus), and God of War (Sony Santa Monica Studios) drive players to care for their character by showing how their character overcomes challenges and bonds with other characters within a carefully crafted narrative.

Lastly, design control is the way that the designers of a game chose to present encounters to players in order to give players opportunities to express their character’s identities through gameplay. Examples of this can be found in Elden Ring (FromSoftware), Gunfire Reborn (Duoyi Games), Hades (Supergiant Games). These games all provide challenging encounters that require players to use their character’s unique abilities and skills to triumph. This moment of triumph builds a concrete bond between a player’s mental model of their character and that character’s representation within the game’s mechanics.

RPGs are a genre of games very near and dear to my heart. The potential for player reactivity, mechanical complexity, narrative depth, and the feeling of overcoming great challenges in your own personal way highlight the heights of what games as a medium can achieve. I’m obviously biased, but I hope this very brief analysis of such a wide and varied genre imparts a tiny bit of my love for it!

Adam Millard’s video: [RPGs Were Never About Roleplaying](https://youtu.be/1kNi3cLB0sI?si=5fcDhsjCzTXneLYl)